Whatever you say.
So they interviewed me and they asked me, they asked some other guy in the interview, did he read his books?
He read every one of them.
They asked me, did I read my books?
I said, come on.
I said, I got a huge collection of the Mather, Cotton Mather and Increase Mather in their sermons.
I said, I defy any rhythm to read that garbage.
I have to tell you, I received several phone calls.
from people telling me that I blasphemed the name of the Lord, and what kind of person was I, and I would rot in hell for the rest of my life.
And, you know, you don't make statements like that in public magazines.
But you asked me the question, am I a scholar?
Steve Riley, Steve Riley at the Restorical Society walking me through, he said, there is a great unpublished manuscript by Cotton Mehta, Biblioteca Americana.
There it sits.
He said, it awaits publication, because he said, and he's been there for 50 years.
He said, I've seen them come and spend two days on it, and they're gone.
He said, it's impenetrable.
And it's exactly what you said, you know.
By style, content, and design.
By everything.
Every imagined, but there is no addition critical or analyzed,
But my point is that from a rag picker's mentality,
From what?
Rag pickers mentality.
I acquire anything.
I do it without discrimination.
And that's the whole idea.
What happened was, at one point I decided that the interaction, there is a link with some mechanism of history by experiencing holding, or not holding so much,
just possessing for a period of time or having these early imprints, they strike a responsive chord.
For you?
For me.
Probably the most telling example I can give you and one of the most meaningful books I've ever read is a book called The Last Men of the Revolution, which is imperfect at best, but it's a book that was published about 1865.
Some guy went around.
and found out there were seven guys living who had fought in 1865, who had fought in the revolution.
And he visited them all, took that picture, took that picture, and there was the photograph, they printed them up, and each photograph was in the book, and it was a narrative of his... And I have copies, which I got two copies, they're two different issues of the book, but I have two copies which I have preserved and will give my kids.
And in reading that book, the idea of seeing the picture of these guys had a very striking effect on me.
So that to some degree, I would say that if I really were to examine it, why am I collecting these?
How did you find this book?
How did you learn about it?
Oh, no, it's kind of important.
Did you just ran into it?
You ran into it.
I mean, it's, you know, life experience.
Probably you would cost a lot of money.
Oh, no, no.
It's a known book, and it's quite expensive.
Probably today it's about, I would say, $700, $800.
It's not a cheap book.
It's important for its photographic.
1860?
1860, yeah.
But anyway, but I got those books.
And I got a couple of the books that I got from my kids.
Robert Lipsight's Put Me in the Zoo, and I remember called Old Rock.
Why do you hold that for the kids as opposed to, how?
I told each.
I want my children to have certain books.
Yeah, but can we go through the numbers?
Can you give me an itemized itemization?
Give me some numbers of what you have.
Oh, well, okay.
Let me get back to the idea, because you're going to have to follow this through, on collecting another of the ideas of numbers.
When I got in, because this is more important than numbers, when I decided, or whatever it was, to try to accumulate these early imprints, I was very fortunate in that no one else had done it for 50 years.
And those people who bought 17th century American imprints
bought the book, bought those books that they bought either for historical content, whether it was a law book or an important book or a sermon, but it was generally a bijou item.
The imperfect copies, the things in rags, the things in tattered bindings and what have you, were out of commerce.
They were in drawers.
The booksellers like Goodspeed or Robinson or Papantonio or all these other great dealers who had accumulated this stuff over a lifetime of dealing
found that it was not merchantable but would never throw it away, when they died or got rid of it, there were still these corpuses that were left.
C-O-R-P-U-S-E-S.
Yes.
Anyway, I walked in and I skimmed everything that was around.
I bought everything I could get my hands on.
And I simply was fortunate as having the... I was the right guy at the right time.
I bought it.
I bought it indiscriminately and wound up having
a very, very great holding of this.
There's no private holding there.
This holding could not be duplicated today.
The only way it could be would be in some catastrophic economic event where great libraries holding this material simply disgorge them.
I mean, and I don't... So what happens to this collection?
It gets added to hopefully for another 20 or 30 years.
and then gets dispersed.
But the value... Wait a minute.
Don't go buy it with one verb.
I mean, we need dispersed.
The likelihood is, no one needs... If it's such an extraordinary collection... No one needs... Shouldn't it be retained?
No one needs a third tip.
Everything that I have, if my collection is... I didn't say my collection is extraordinary.
I said simply,
It's the best collection that's been formed in 100 years.
But if you want to put it in a perspective, even having collected, and even assuming another 20 years of collecting, in the area of what I have, it probably would rank somewhere between, I would say, there will be always five collections better than mine.
Institutional.
Nice to meet you.
Thanks a lot.
See you later.
Okay.
There will always be five better.
Now, I don't know, and I certainly don't think the world needs a six, or something plugged in between five and ten.
If it were unique, then that's enough.
It's not unique.
There are many unique things in it.
In other words, I probably... Well, how about the unique things then?
But how about them?
Let's say in another five years or another ten years,
I have somewhat in excess of 5,000 Evans items, 5,000 American ink prints printed before 1800, and I have probably 150 printed before 1700.
And those numbers today probably put me in, let's say, the top 10 of holdings that would include Antiquarium, Harvard, Mass Historical, Boston Public, Library of Congress.
I probably have more.
Library of Congress, Library of Philadelphia, whatever it may be, Huntington.
But my collection starts to approximate those holdings.
Secondly, if you look at those institutional holdings, a very interesting thing is that when it becomes institutionalized, it becomes sacred and purified.
Everything the institution has is perfect, or is perceived to be
without fault when you go into the stacks no i'm not saying that those that know know differently but when you go into the stacks and you take a look at what in fact the object is as opposed to what the object is perceived the book that is cataloged as x turns out to be x but lacking the first four and last 30 pages torn bound and whatever the hell it may be and from an institutional perspective my collection as to quality and i say this only because
The odor of how I buy is I buy all the shit.
I don't buy all the shit.
I buy everything, but there's good stuff and bad stuff.
So you cull?
Whether I cull or I don't cull, certainly I cull, and certainly I look to enhance and make better what I do.
If I clean my collection up, which I'm in the process of doing, and I wind up with 5,000... What does that mean?
Weeding?
Weeding.
I take some, multiple copies I don't want.
Many things I'll keep.
I have, for example, there's a book, Commodographia, by Cotton Matter.
Increased Matter.
Which is a great scientific treatise of the 17th century in America.
I have 20 copies.
I'm sorry, what?
I have 20 copies of that book, printed in 1683.
You have 20?
20.
Why do you have 20?
Why not?
Brindley had nine Elliott Bogles.
I only had three.
That violates every rule of collecting.
No, it doesn't.
Exactly.
That's the whole point.
You're being, what some people would say, a pig.
No.
I'm collecting only because that... You're denying 19 people a copy of that book.
No, because I don't have... Of the 19 copies I have... 20.
Of the 20 copies that I have, let's say a couple of them are complete.
Some are missing one or two pages.
Well, if you're talking variants, that's another story.
There are many variants in it, but unless you can examine them all together, that's another world of why you have multiple copies, which I'm not, at the moment, really want to get into.
But what I'm getting at is this.
What if you can have 40?
Would you have 40?
In 17th century American imprints, I will buy all that I can get my hands on and not yet dispose of.
In 18th century American inference, I have many multiple copies, and I'm in the process of saying, well, here's an example.
I have a copy of Jonathan Edwards' Freedom of Will, or whatever the hell it is, very important, Inquiry in the Freedom of Will, very important, a seminal book on, let's say, American thinking, free thinking.
Now I have a copy in a contemporary binding tool
Very nice copy.
And I have the Brindley copy in Later Rappers.
Beautiful.
Very nice copy.
Do I need both of them?
No, but I probably will keep both.
Do you have the Brindley?
I don't know.
I have a number, maybe 30 or 40 Brindley copies, if not more.
But what I'm saying is, there's no... That does not come inexpensively, I don't think.
What's inexpensive?
The book's an important book, so I mean, it's not a question if you come to ten dollars.
Less than the market will bear at any given point.
No, that's irrelevant, but the market's imperfect.
I'm not even, if you want to discuss economics of the market, it's another thing.
But the point I'm saying is that I probably will keep both of them.
I have no compelling reason to keep them, except they're nice, and I'm a collector, and I keep them.
On the other hand, if I have ten copies of a sermon by Moses Levin,
And they're all the same, uncut.
I don't need nine copies, but I bought them, and when I get rid of them, I'll get rid of them.
I have so many catalogs of Huntington... Dupes.
Dupes.
Ain't they nice?
Yeah, I think they're not like nothing.
I think that at the Worcester Fair, which I'm on the board of the Guarded Library, L&T Restbets, they came up, and he said, take everything you want to give to us, and I said, between boxes,
You got the Huntington?
Oh, wonderful.
I read them all the time.
I know.
Are yours priced?
I paid $50.
No, no, no.
The individual price.
Oh, you mean the price?
Yeah, the price.
They're wonderful.
Well, they all came from Yale.
They were Yale's copies.
I don't know where he got them.
Whatever.
Great stuff.
They're all Yale's copies.
Yale, the accession?
I can't imagine.
Well, the point I'm saying is that I'm still in the process.
My collection...
is still in the process of being formed.
But when you say to me, once formed... How old are you?
53.
Once formed... So, I don't ask that.
I'm just curious, because you've got good 20, 30 years.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, once formed... There was a purpose to that question.
Yeah.
That's what I'm saying to you, that I figure that if I can go along collecting, when I'm done collecting, when I am at the point where I am no longer able or what have you to collect, I should have
10,000 American imprints before 1800, in varying conditions, great to nothing.
And you ask me, what am I going to do with the collection?
And my thinking at the moment is, as I said to you, no one needs a third tip.
If I were to put the collection up at auction, like Streeter did with his collection, and fund the major libraries that I'm interested in,
helping and do help, and give them, let's say, a draw, you know, a do-bill on the collection, they can bid up to X dollars, then the collection will be disseminated and distilled so that those major holdings are added to, as they wish, and the stuff gets out into the action, which everyone will enjoy.
There's nothing that I own, I think, and because of what I'm doing, that needs to transcend me.
I don't need a money.
So therefore, the satisfaction is personal, isn't it?
The satisfaction is personal, but it's more than personal.
It's like, you know, an ant carrying... All I'm doing is I happen to be able to be at a point in time, and you start looking philosophically at life, why are you here?
Besides gratifying your...
I'm able to simply synthesize some disparate things that are around and pull together stuff that might otherwise ever disappear and pass it along.
That's it.
Pass it through my kidneys.
Well, I believe that, personally, I think it's important.
This stuff has to go out and be recycled.
I do too, but I'm saying is that... Basically, the collector takes better care of things.
Of course.
If Dick Manning pays $2 million for Shakespeare, you can bet your ass he's going to take very good care of those four books.
I take care of my books, okay?
But what I'm saying is, if there's any importance to what I'm doing, it's in the synthesis of accreting to myself.
all of this shit that's around, which is less around than people realize.
Do you see yourself as a preserver?
Oh, yes.
Are you saving things from destruction?
Yeah.
Am I saving things from destruction?
I wouldn't categorize it that way.
I'm saving things.
That's all.
Let me put you a softball, okay?
That's one of the themes of my book, Out of the Park.
The collector, as far as I'm concerned,
is responsible, in many cases, Annette, right this time, for the preservation of human achievement.
There are things which would disappear if it weren't for some apric, some gold, some obsessed person who collects and saves.
I went to Peabys' library.
Peabys has thousands of things.
that are nowhere else to be found.
But it's not obsession, you see.
Isaiah Thomas is that one.
I think that.
That's where Rogers started as wrong.
Of course he is.
But I think that.
Well, I said to Leonard Baskin, he loves the American interpreter.
I said, well, I said, the guy said things like fairy pieces.
Ferry tickets are very important.
I wanted to start collecting.
I was thinking about trying to figure out how I could start collecting credit cards of the 40s and 50s and 60s.
I think that's an area of credit cards.
Very interesting, isn't it?
Yeah, you think about credit cards.
They wouldn't be plastic.
Yeah, they're all plastic.
I used to take my mother's credit card.
What was it important?
I mean, it was a prestigious thing.
You had a credit card?
It was a thing, but they ran it through a thing.
That's right.
It didn't go off into a computer place.
It was a plate.
Well, it was a plate, but in the very early gas cards, you know, it was very prestigious.
You had a very good bank account.
You know, the phone company realized that if they had an answering machine... Of course they are.
But the thing that I'm saying is that
that collecting, the instinct of collecting, I think, is one of the primary primitive instincts of mankind.
Every society collects, whether it's cowry beads or leaves or shells or coins, it doesn't matter what it is.
The instinct of collecting, which is the mirror image of, I guess, your existence on Earth, or man's existence, whatever it may be, is
satisfying in itself to recognize.
When you say to me, do I collect a preserve?
I collect because it's imprinted in me.
I happen to have come across an area of collecting that is immensely satisfying to me, which is book collecting, and in the area with the limits that I have, which is limits of language.
I mean, I don't speak another language well enough to bother to read.
I mean, I can get along with a couple of languages.
But the idea
of collecting, you can, and I think you might before you get the, you want to look at what instincts make humans collect?
What do people collect?
They collect everything.
The best thing I could tell you, there's a magazine called the Antique Trader, and if you've never seen it, you shouldn't write your book before you see it.
You buy it.
I don't know where the hell it's published, but find it.
It's not difficult to find.
And it's published.
And you look in the back.
The Antique Trader.
It's not made in Antique Trader.
Okay.
I've written in that.
But you look in the back of the Antique Trader.
Can you see what people collect?
They have the want ads.
Just read them.
They collect bottle caps and magical cards.
I served in Vietnam and came back to the elbows.
Okay.
There you go.
But that's the type of... No, no, no.
That's... Well, I raise it because people do collect everything.
Well, okay.
These are trophies, perhaps.
Those are trophies as such.
But what I'm saying is that getting beyond, let's say, that specific idea of scalps or what... People collected scalps.
And you're right.
You're absolutely... I was with Johnny Jenkins one day.
Kenny Rendell had Napoleon's nuts at one of the book fairs.
And he wanted 20 grand for it.
And I was with you on it.
No question, they are.
Absolutely, totally not.
Ask Bill Reese or what, or Reese or Ginsberg.
The story is known, okay?
The doctor came in and cut off his fucking nuts.
and this pecker, and they had it.
Redwood is one of the great relics around.
How come I'm nervous?
Well, how come?
Because you're a Greek.
Anyway, so I'm at the book fair, and Rendell's got it.
I think it was Rendell.
Rendell's got it?
He's an autograph guy.
What are you doing with these things?
He had it, and he wanted 20 grand for it.
And Johnny came up to him and said, Johnny came up to him and said, maybe he owns it now.
He said, look, I don't want to buy it, but will you rent it to me?
For an hour for a hundred bucks.
Oh, come on!
Kenny said, yes.
And Johnny gave him a hundred dollars.
And Johnny said, I just wanted to have Napoleon's nuts in my hand for an hour.
True story.
How do they get removed?
Oh, yes.
We know.
You don't know.
But I'm telling you, yes, the knowledge of that is known.
And it is not apocryphal in any sense of the word.
How did they preserve all of these?
They didn't.
They were desiccated.
There it is, you know, a little piece of shriveled flesh like the yellow.
But the idea, again, of the question of collecting, what motivates and drives people to collect?
And I'm not talking, I think that even the idea of prestige, the idea of buying paintings and hanging them on the wall.
Why is a picture, you know, a thousand dollar book is an expensive book.
I'm not saying that I spent more myself.
I'm trying to say something.
It doesn't matter whether you have my means or you don't have my means.
A thousand dollar book is an expensive book.
I didn't say it's expensive to me or it's expensive to you.
It's an expensive book.
A thousand dollar... It's a lot of fucking money to spend for a book.
No, no.
But a painting or a print or a piece of silver... A painting is a unique expression of a creative person.
Or a print or a Picasso printer or what do you call it?
Print or what have you.
The idea that I'm getting at is that people who collect
and dealing with your gentle mania.
Gentle madness.
Whatever.
Gentle, by the way.
It's an ironic title.
I know.
The idea of trying to channel it in a parallel way, open up parallel channels of collecting, and start equating absolute value.
to objects and what is expensive, that books are cheap, books are plentiful and cheap, as opposed to anything else in the world of collecting.
But people who collect, and for whatever reasons they collect, for prestige, for ego, for pleasure, for preservation of knowledge,
Whatever it is, in the end, they preserve.
Because they collect, objects are preserved.
More so, or not more so, but in many ways different from institutional.
Institution, the idea, they preserve these objects.
These are, you know, identifications of the human existence.
An institution is precisely that.
Ed Wolfe was telling me when he came in and took over the library company in Philadelphia, garbage.
Yeah, but he found stuff.
Stuff.
Wonderful.
He found them.
Yeah, this is not one of my typos.
Follow with this.
Okay, the idea of collectors and the idea of the function of collecting is in the, it's
It really is the identification of a human with his existence.
You know, the most important thing, I mean, my feeling is that the two great significant events of the modern world have been the invention and spread of printing in the Western world and the atomic bomb.
These two twin peaks, as they call them,
of intellectual thought.
Everything else... How about the computer?
Did it stick out between them?
No.
It's just, those are the two great events.
The computer is essentially an evolution of the printed word, in many ways.
Information.
You know, the rapidity, the dissemination of information.
Well, prior to the printed word... There's manuscripts.
People wrote books.
Yeah, but I mean, the Romans had
You could do a thousand copies of a book in a week.
You'd just have a lot of slaves who were very skilled copies.
That's right.
But, you know, in America, when printing, you know, got out in Maine's Germany... You know what?
As this thing ages just a little bit, like it's a little fun, try it.
It must be new.
Very nice.
Now it's nice.
Oh, it's got a little bite to it.
Right now it's nice.
I love hard things.
A little quiet, right?
Let me digress and tell you a wonderful story about book collecting.
That you will deal with any way you want.
You know how to say, fuck you in Yiddish?
I'd like to hear.
Trust me.
Anyway.
Annette, write that down, please.
Ten years ago, I get a phone call from a book dealer, from a book dealer by the name of Jim Rizek, who passed out of your can before you knew him.
What a wonderful guy.
A scandal, but a good scandal.
And Rizek calls me up and says, you want to buy a collection of pornography?
I said, what is it?
It's a huge collection.
I said, I don't want it.
It's going to cost eight grand.
Okay.
So, without me, I'm foreshortening this end of it, but it's not really particularly germane or that important.
Now, anyway, so I bought a collection, signed and signed.
I sent a couple of my guys out to pick it up.
Guys here from... No, not my company.
And I sent them in a truck, and they go out there.
They come back, and I say, you have no idea what you bought.
You bought a house full of books.
By the time I was done getting the books, there were 268 cartons.
What I bought was essentially an example of the world of pornographic literature from 1950 to 1975.
So we're talking about ephemeral things.
No, pocketbooks.
Yeah, pocketbooks.
I bought 20,000 pocketbooks.
10,000 magazines, 50,000 pictures, God knows what, filling up this box.
They had to schlep the damn thing for weeks to get the damn thing in.
What did you do with it?
I put it in the basement of my office.
I didn't know what to do with it.
Let's go back.
Why did you buy it?
You know, you get on an airplane, you pitch hostesses on the airplane.
Listen, you want to go on the back and play?
You know, you pitch a hundred times.
Someone says, yes, why?
I mean, you know, why?
So they are in trouble again.
You know, because...
The quantity and the dollars were reasonable at the time, so I bought it.
Who put it together?
What name?
A guy put it together.
He was crazy.
I don't know.
Was it a good collection, as such collection goes?
It was a non-for-real.
It was beyond comparison.
It was good.
Oh, it was great.
And I'm sorry, I got rid of it, and I would say that I'm not unhappy.
I thought you made money on it.
Well, I'll tell you about that.
This is, as I said, a great story.
So I got the stuff, and I got it in the cellar of my office.
And I must say, it is probably the only time of trash, unredeemable trash.
Anything you wanted was there.
So why did you send it to the dump?
First, I never thought of the dump.
I thought of only putting it out as garbage.
Well, that's the same thing.
No, no, no, it isn't the same thing, because I'm unfortunately a known personage in my village.
I couldn't put the shit out in front.
I couldn't burn it.
I mean, it was too much stuff.
I was, I simply... Right, you could do a box, two boxes a week.
Take me two years.
Believe me, whatever it was.
I'm saying you couldn't dispose of it.
I'm saying to you that you're wrong.
I'm saying that I could not dispose of it in the area that I lived in.
It was easier to forget about it.
the fact that this tumor was down in the basements of my office, then to have to deal with starting putting it out in the garbage.
The word would have gotten out.
I didn't want the embarrassment.
I didn't want the notoriety.
Plus it is pornography.
Plus it is pornography, and I had maybe even Dorian on tape.
I had everything, child Dorian, everything.
Oh, really?
This was everything under the sun.
This was the contents of a dirty bookstore.
One of everything in an adult bookstore for 15 years.
Wow.
Were you think that's what this guy did?
No, I don't know what he did.
He bought it.
He was a collector.
So we called Kinsey, and Kinsey wasn't buying it.
Who?
Kinsey Institute in Indiana.
Oh, really?
You weren't buying it?
I didn't want it.
And I finally cut a deal.
I called Johnny Jenkins.
I said, Johnny, can I put it in your cell?
You know, he didn't want no part of it.
I gave it to Terry.
I called Terry Halliday, who's now with Bill Reeses, when he was working for Ray Walton.
And I said to Terry, I said, listen, I got this great collection of pornographers.
It's trash, but it's comprehensive.
And I learned something about it.
I did, just get off the record.
This was one of the great holdings of one of the aspects of society of this period.
And most of the shit had disappeared.
There's a guy named Cliff Shiner, who's the great dealer in pornography, the head of the- S-C-H-E-A-B.
S-C-H-E-A-B, yeah, C.J.
Shiner.
We want to talk to him.
the head of the emergency room at King's County Hospital, he's a doctor in Brooklyn.
He's an MD?
MD, yeah.
He deals in pornography?
The greatest dealer in America, and greatest authority.
The greatest?
Dealer in authority.
Authority?
On pornography?
Yeah.
That is G.D.
Schiner.
C.J.
Schiner, S-C-H-E-I-N-E-R.
And he advertises in AB regularly.
You can call up Jake and get his address.
Where is he?
He works.
And he's the head of the...
Emergency room at Kings County Hospital, Brooklyn.
Well, how do you suppose this happened?
That's true.
But this is an interested and interesting person.
Anyway, so I bought a collection, and I call up Terry Howard, and I tell Terry about it, and I induce him to take the collection.
I said to him, here's the deal.
I'll send it down to you.
268 pounds.
Yeah, I'll send it down to you.
and you pay the freight, I never see it again, and we split whatever you get for it.
How much did you get into it?
Eight grand.
I shift the damn thing down, comes up to Ray Walton in a truck, and they nearly died.
Terry has to rent the warehouse, put it in the end of his mini warehouse.
He shoved it in there for a year, he can't sell it.
And he calls me up one day, says, I gotta get rid of it, I said.
The deal is, you dump it, I don't care what he says,
only thing we can do he says is this he said when johnson was president johnson formed something called the president's committee on pornography and insanity president's commission commission on pornography in 1968 or something like that johnson gave all of his papers to the hrc all of the committee's hearings are there all of the notes and everything
They have no examples of American pornography.
Would you give the collection to the HRC?
I said, you got it.
On December 30th of whatever year, 1981, they trucked the shit over.
I spoke to my accountants.
The university had physical possession of the damn thing, okay?
So I could get a tax, you know, at the time I wanted a tax, I was going to get a valuation.
And they valued the damn thing for about 68 grand.
Did you receive it?
No, I had Terry appraised it and valued it.
But on the basis of 20,000 books or two bucks a book... That's fine, that's fine.
No, no, what I'm... What you put into it was written to a challenge.
No, no, no, but I'm simply saying that without getting into the question of true value, it was undervalued because the quantity was there.
There were 20,000 books.
Plus, you bought a house.
Forget, forget.
No, I understand.
I'm trying... No, there's reason for this, I'm saying.
I'm not trying to defend it from the point of... I understand it.
It wasn't one book that someone said it's worth a million dollars or what have you.
The quantity, the numbers, so many times, so many dollars.
Okay.
They received the collection.
Apparently, Deckard Turner was never informed of this.
Deckard Turner is a minister.
Deckard was upset.
The collection was locked up and put downstairs.
At HRC?
At HRC.
I get an evaluation.
I put it on my taxes.
It's out of your hands.
It's totally on my hands.
Wait.
It's gone.
Okay.
So now I file for a contribution.
It goes before the feds.
And the feds... They question it?
...questioned it.
And they refused it.
They didn't want... No pornography was worth money.
In April 4th?
20 years ago.
So back and forth.
Goes to the engineers, and I'm fighting with the IRS for seven or eight years.
I get this guy, Shiner, to go down, and
Get permission.
The feds, when they wanted to go in to see it, what do you call it?
The Decker wouldn't let him in.
Wouldn't let him see it.
It was locked up.
Okay, you know, they wanted to make an evaluation.
Why didn't he get rid of it?
Listen, wait.
He didn't.
It was locked up.
It's there.
It was a gift, whatever it was.
I finally get Shiner to come in, and he makes an evaluation, says it's worth $150,000, $150,000.
You meet with the feds, and the feds say, look, if you don't ask for an additional amount of money, we'll drop the whole thing.
I was vindicated, that particular aspect was settled, and everything is quiet.
So is that it?
Three months ago, I get a letter.
Three months ago?
I get a letter.
We're talking May of?
Three months ago.
May 90.
Yeah, May 90.
I get a letter from the dean of the University of Texas Law School, dear Mr. Zinman.
We are now in possession of the Zinman Collection of Pornography.
Oh, my God!
And we are in the process of cataloging it.
Capital Z, capital C. Cataloging it.
And we'd like you to give us a CV on yourself and the history of the collection.
And I called up this guy that had the library and I said, what the hell is going on?
I said, listen.
This is a great stuff.
He says, we knew all about it.
Decker Turner didn't want to do anything with it.
He wouldn't let us touch it.
We got him to give it to the library because the law library
is very much interested in this type of... Was he laughing?
No, he was very serious.
And he says, I said, I've got to tell you something.
Remember the guy's name?
I'll give you the letters.
I'll give it to you.
That's a good story.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Wait a minute.
Tell him the story.
I know.
I said, how the hell did you get it?
He says, you don't know.
You want to know we got it.
So we're cataloging it.
I said, but what is the Zinman collection?
He says, when it was the deed of gift was the Zinman collection.
I said, those fucking sons of bitches.
You want to talk about immortality?
I said, let me tell you.
So I call up Terry Halliday and I tell Terry the story.
Terry says to me, did you ask him about a book plate?
And I said, ah, wait!
He says, what about the Friends of the Zittman Collection?
I called up McCormick and I said, Mark, you want money from me?
You're going to sit on the Council of the Friends of the Zittman Collection.
Isn't that funny?
It is like... That's the HIC story.
Isn't it wonderful?
Did you ever talk to Decker Turner?
I sat, I was invited to talk at Yale.
There was a symposium at Yale.
And there were people talking about collecting and aspects of collecting.
And Deckard was, I was, there were three speakers.
I was one, Deckard was one, and I don't remember what the third was.
And I was sitting next to Deckard.
I couldn't understand why he was so... Buggy.
No, not buggy, but let's say a little bit distant.
And...
I didn't know whether he was a minister or what have you, and I mean, here was this thing that started from, I didn't want the fucking thing, I just shipped it off down there, but now it's got a life of its own, the Zinman collection.
Just, did you tell me, I don't remember precisely how you got it?
I just got it from this guy Rizik, Rizik Tittany, and I bought it.
So I didn't see it?
Yeah.
And you thought it might be?
Yeah, big man for the buck, you see, that's what I'm trying to say, that... It was a single, no, it was a single volume.
eight grand i wouldn't afford it but you know a collection thousands of books your unit price did you personally ever look through any of them uh of course i'm just curious i mean did they just come in and they went they did of course i opened some of them up i mean but uh i'm not particularly any idea who the guy was to put together uh some not not some not but i just was into uh
He was into stuff, and this was the stuff he was into.
He bought it.
Was he a dealer or a closet collector?
It was really, I guess, a closet.
Whatever.
This was whatever the gratification was he got to go.
The more power to it, he seemed.
Did he catalog it and all that?
Yeah, some catalog.
He catalogs it.
There were a thousand movies there.
I can take a leak over there.
I think of what I'm doing, and that will give you a better flavor.
I've got a question, sir.
I know you are.
Get some cheese there.
Here's the thing.
What I want to do
as a collector.
And there's no question but that I am absolutely heaven heels over in love with the printed word.
And not so much the printed word, but the printed word on paper.
The idea of the image of type on paper is something that I find to be truly beautiful.
Stimulating.
I mean, it doesn't matter what the language is.
I don't have to read it.
It's simply like, it's just the type.
It's simply, I like the idea of everything that the letter on the printed page stands for and what it means.
And what I'm doing in the idea of accumulating to myself
And as I said, I can't be any more serious, and I don't want to overly overstress the point.
The pleasure of possessing something for me is totally transcendental.
I don't need to own anything.
I don't care about it.
I don't need possessions.
Yeah, but you have it.
But I have it, but I have it almost as a... I have it simply as a caretaker.
Yeah, but you also started out.
Oh, yeah, but the point that I sorted out is, again, to synthesize and distill and get together.
I'm gathering this stuff together because by doing so, the act of gathering gives me pleasure, gives me satisfaction, gives me stimulus on a lot of areas, and is...
simply, in a very, very minor way, not unimportant.
I'm doing something that has some meaning.
It has some meaning, again, simply on this basis of me carrying the piece of bread a couple of inches.
All right, now a question.
Will it be mildly ironic to you, 100 years from now, the only Zim in the collection that it endures is the pornographic one?
I love it.
But what I'm getting at is... But you had nothing to do with it.
You were just a broker in that.
I owned it.
My collection.
It came your way and you did it.
That's what happens, you know?
But it really didn't reflect your past.
It should be named after the guy who put it together.
Could be.
You think?
Yeah, that's why I wanted it, but it didn't.
Well, you've got to understand it should have been, but those bastards down there, Halliday probably pulled that off and insisted it be named the Zillman Collection.
What's the name of the guy that has it?
I don't know.
I have the papers.
Do you get it?
Oh, yeah.
So we can get it there.
Probably.
Actually, we'd like to get it.
I'll try to get it.
I have it somewhere.
Maybe they know down there.
But in any event, what I'm getting at is that some of the things I'm doing, for example, I'm writing a book on the history of the American Bible.
You were writing this?
Yes.
So therefore you are entering the level of scholarship therefore?
Well, I've done about four of my books already.
I asked you earlier if you were a scholar and you said no.
That has nothing to do.
Being a scholar and writing books, I mean, of all of the people in the world, I mean... Well, I don't know.
That's what it is.
A scholar is a... That's an oxymoronic statement.
I mean, I'm writing scholarship is not the word.
Writing fiscal implements may be something.
But you read my book.
Did I give you to write a fellow book?
No.
Oh, come on, you haven't?
Come on.
I thought I sent you a ratatouille book.
Okay.
You got one down here?
Yeah, I'll give you a couple books I wrote.
Okay.
I've written several books.
And... It's very important, by the way.
It's very important to me to know that.
Oh, all right, so now you know that.
I'm very upset that I didn't know that before.
Ah, well, it was the walkies, dealing with the, what do you call it, the, the... Well, I don't know.
The hinderling.
I'll give you the book.
You'll love it.
But I did a book on Audubon.
They're not really books, but I mean, I published several books, which I had something to do.
I did a reprint of the American Color Play books in the 19th century.
I did...
As a matter of fact, if I have it, I'll give you my last copy of your license.
You deserve it.
No, no, no, no, no.
I have my own.
That isn't the point.
But the things that I've been doing have been, to some end, to promulgate the artifact of the book.
Now, when you said to me, what am I collecting and how am I collecting and what does it mean?
What you see here, unfortunately, is simply over there in that other room where you saw the early American imprints, that was my holdings up to about 1720.
Now, given the opportunity to put all of my 18th century books on shelves, this building may be able to take it.
I don't think so.
I've done simply a lot of stuff.
I have hundreds of boxes in the basement here.
I have hundreds of boxes at my home, I have in my office, a lot of stuff.
Do you have boxes of things that you don't know who they're in on?
No, but I don't like boxes.
I put them in boxes because I was moving and trying to get some stuff settled out.
I'll give you an idea of... Do you have a guy to make these oak shelves for you?
Yeah.
Poorly.
I'll give you an idea.
I've bought more books from Quaritch, I believe.
They told me that possibly only one other person in the history of Quaritch... In the history of Quaritch?
In the history of Quaritch may have bought more books from them than I did.
I don't remember.
It has nothing to do with value, and value is minuscule, but I mean quantity, numbers of books.
Could you do this often?
Nicholas.
Nicholas is wonderful.
I have to run to the place.
I have to run to the place of club mags.
I bought a lot of stuff in Edwards.
Very interesting.
Anyway.
Brian buys spaghetti.
But what I'm saying, though, you see, but that's a different world.
And when you make a statement to me, the action is on the west coast of America.
But I'm saying that... But I'm saying you make the statement that Brian buys spaghetti.
Now, I would be... There's only one book collector of significance in England, and it's spaghetti.
But ask Nicholas Barker to quantify the statement.
What is a book collector of significance?
How much money does Getty spend per year on books?
Lots.
Okay.
Getty probably spends on books per year what California spends on books per year.
Okay?
And I don't know that, and I'm just trying to make some kind of... I think it's a fair... Okay, but the thing I'm trying to... It may be wrong, but it's not far wrong.
What I'm trying to say is that the action in California is great action.
Okay.
If you're a bookseller trying to make your mark in California.
If you're a Weinstein, Priscilla Giusellis, who says she does really good out there.
Priscilla's okay.
She's a very good associate.
She's okay.
There's not very much Priscilla wouldn't do to sell a book in Weinstein.
I love Priscilla.
That's okay.
I think she's wonderful.
She's wonderful.
I met her only once.
I met her at one of the sales.
Okay, as far as my Modern American Fiction, I have on her three, four thousand bucks.
Three, four thousand.
And it's fun because when I was collecting in the areas I was collecting, which was at the time, early voyages and travels and early American imprints,
You could go to not only book fairs, but little local book fairs and pick tables, whatever.
It's like a nickel to buy a pinnacle.
And you could buy books.
And I was buying and bought and put together a very nice collection of American fiction.
And I have that now, you know, so that's something to live in.
But my library, the other rooms in the house that had books in it, I never could put them together.
I never could get a room large enough
to hold and house my collection that I could at least have access to and enjoy.
And here, I'll be able, for example, to put up American Bibles.
Now, I have a collection of American Bibles, which you saw three, but let's say in talking about, I'm doing a book on the history of the American Bible, and what it will be is going to be a leaf book or a portfolio of leaves from Great American Bibles.
And essentially, I have multiple copies of every great American Bible, except the 1661 Eliot, which I only have half of, which I'll use some of the leaves for.
And the second Eliot, I have three, two of which are really good, one of which I may break and just keep a New Testament and just use some of the leaves in the Old Testament, which is imperfect.
I have two copies, for example, of the first Catholic Bible.
I have four copies of the Aiken Bible.
I have three, four copies of the Hebrew Bible.
I mean, every important Bible I have, I have a group of things.
Now, when you're doing business, you divorce your mind from the rest of your passion.
Do you become a very good business then?
Only until someone calls me on books or I get a catalog of letters.
I mean, the way it works is that I generally, I get to the office
Somewhere between 7 and 7.30.
And I call A1.
I speak to the deal with an A1.
Generally every day.
See what's going on.
About 11 o'clock.
Yeah, before noon.
And then... Every day you probably deal with A1.
Not a general rule, I'm on a phone table.
Then... Oh, yes.
And others.
Whatever.
A lot of them.
They just shoot the breeze and see what's going on.
Then from about, I would say, 8.30 to 9.30, I deal with some of my business.
Then about 9.30, I get the morning mail.
And my books came in, my catalogs came in, my business letters, forget the business letters, but the book mail.
Then about, I spent about an hour, hour and a half on that.
And about 10.30 or so, I had my business meetings.
You know, unless I see something, I want to start with books.
But I generally intersperse, unlike Keynes.
Keynes used to do his business in the morning and play in the afternoon, but I generally intersperse it.
When it comes to business, though, are you a committed businessman?
Oh, yes.
Is it something, do you enjoy that?
Yes.
Oh, no, no, I enjoy business.
But, again, the business that I have is... Is this a business that you start?
Yes.
Can you briefly describe what it is?
Basically, we run a company that deals primarily in international trade.
And the objects of trade that we are involved with is construction machinery, heavy earth moving machinery.
These are things that you build, these are things that you buy and sell.
These are things we buy and sell.
And as dealers, as representatives, as agents.
And we deal also in the area of...
the energy area, buying them, dealing with the major utilities, selling them... Is Earthworm a derivative of Bookworm?
No, Earthworm arose from a series of... The name was taken from a series of articles that appeared in the Saturday... Well, it was...
Earthworm was a fictitional name or a characterization of Catepillar, fictitious characterization of Catepillar Tractor Company.
One of the employees of Catepillar Tractor Company was a writer and he wrote and developed a whole series of books on the Earthworm Tractor Company and a mythical salesman, sort of loosely patterned after, I would guess,
a humorous series of events using the construction machinery company as the foil and as the basis for it.
And I took the name, I think, in about 1960.
And it's been that early since.
Yeah, but... For 69, 20 years.
So you've been a businessman since your 20s.
Oh, yeah.
But I think that more and more I want to write.
And I want to write in the area of books.
to do things with books.
I, as I've said, I started to say I'm planning to do this portfolio of leaves from American Bibles.
I want to do a book and expect to do a book on Incarnabula Americana, if you will.
Leaves from, well, sugar.
Well, Inconabula published in the UK.
Inconabula is Inconabula published before 1501.
Okay, but in Europe about America, sure.
No, no.
Inconabula... I can't imagine if there's any Inconabula published in this continent.
Inconabula Americana.
For, you know, everything's in the eye of the writer, and the definition of what is Inconabula.
And what is Americana.
Okay.